---
layout: post
title:  "Viruses and their discovery"
date:   2022-11-28
blurb: "a short introduction to viruses"
---
<style>body {text-align: justify}</style>

#### Prologue
By chance, viruses became the subject of my doctoral thesis in 2018. Fascinated at the time by biophysical techniques, I joined a lab that was using state-of-the-art microscopy techniques to study viruses and how they interact with host cells. Since I was new to the field of virology, I started reading about the very basics of what viruses are, when and how they were discovered and how they have been intertwined with all forms of life. This has been one of the most captivating periods of learning for me and I spent hours going through the literature of the last century to recreate the excitement of the beginnings of virology. The following is part of the introduction of my doctoral thesis – covering the discovery of viruses in general, and Ebola virus (the focus of my research) in particular. 

#### Viruses
Viruses were discovered at the end of the 19th century as the causative agent of diseases, for which no bacterial origin could be identified at the time. Their nature remained a mystery until the development of filtration techniques to isolate bacteria, culturing techniques to observe cell growth and – a milestone in the history of virology – the development of the electron microscope. The first disease of viral origin was identified in 1892 by Dimitri Ivanovsky[^1], who investigated the cause of the mottled browning of leaves of infected tobacco plants, which followed mosaic-like patterns (famously known today as the tobacco-mosaic disease, TMD). Using unglazed porcelain filters with pore sizes designed to retain bacteria[^2], he investigated the sap of infected plants and excluded bacterial origin. Just a few years later, Martinus Beijerinck independently confirmed his experiments and further extended the study, discovering that the “filterable agent” is liquid and soluble[^3]. Together with his finding that it only replicated in living cells, Beijerinck coined the definition of the newly discovered pathogen as an obligate intracellular parasite. He introduced the term “virus” to describe what he initially referred to as contagium vivum fluidum[^4], or contagious living fluid. These early studies sparked a debate that lasted for decades on whether viruses are particles or liquids, which was settled only in 1939 with the first electron micrograph of the virus causing TMD (tobacco-mosaic virus, TMV[^5]. The first images of TMV confirmed its particulate, highly ordered structure and small size of approximately 15 nm in diameter, while marking a breakthrough for EM as a tool to study microscopic pathogens. Owing to its role in discovering viruses as distinct microbes, its stability when isolated from infected plants and the ability to crystallize easily due to its highly symmetric structure, TMV is still today one of the most studied viruses, overshadowing even the identification of the first animal and human viruses, foot-and-mouth disease virus[^6] and yellow fever virus (whose discovery is reviewed here[^7]. 
Since the early works on TMV, numerous viruses have been discovered in all kingdoms of life, with an estimated 320,000 viruses infecting mammals alone 8. While differing greatly not only in host species and disease they cause but also in shape, size and structural composition, all viruses share basic properties: they contain an RNA or DNA genome protected by a protein shell and, in some cases, an additional membrane envelope, and they rely on host cells for replication. Virus morphology, size and genome structure are the basis for their classification into different virus families with 26 human virus families known to date 9,10. These basic properties further define to a large extent the molecular biology of viruses, revealing important insights into their replication strategy in host cells and pathogenicity of newly emerging or unknown viruses.
#### Ebola viruses 
Ebola viruses (EBOVs) are highly pathogenic RNA viruses of the order Mononegavirales, belonging to the family Filoviridae, the latter of which was introduced after the discovery of the unusually shaped Marburg viruses (MARVs) and EBOVs 11. Both filoviruses are endemic in Africa and are pathogenic to humans and non-human primates. In 2011, the family was extended by a new member, Cuevaviruses, which were discovered in deceased bats of the species Miniopterus schreibersii 12 and have since then been discovered in live and deceased bats in Spain and Hungary 13,14. The latest addition to the Filoviridae family infecting mammalian hosts 15 are Dianloviruses, discovered in pteropodid bats in China 16.
EBOVs contain a non-segmented RNA genome of negative sense polarity, are filamentous in shape and contain a membrane envelope. Six EBOV species have been isolated to date, with the most recent member, Bombali virus, discovered in bats in 2018 17. Of the other five EBOV species, Zaire, Sudan, Bundigbuyo and Taï Forest are known to cause diseases in humans (ordered from highest to lowest case-fatality rate), while Reston virus has so far only been associated with disease in non-human primates. 
Due to their high pathogenicity and lack of antiviral treatments, EBOVs are classified as biosafety level-4 (BSL4) pathogens. One of the first EBOV species discovered, the most pathogenic and responsible for the majority of the recurring disease outbreaks, is Zaire EBOV. Having infected a cumulative number of 32867 people in 20 outbreaks from 1976 to 2022 (with recent outbreaks that started in 2021 and are still ongoing) and case-fatality rates up to 90%, it is accordingly the focus of most research on EBOVs to date, including the work presented here. 

**Discovery and disease**

EBOVs were first discovered in 1976 during haemorrhagic fever outbreaks in Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The sudden emergence of a disease with unusual symptoms for the typically circulating infectious diseases in Central Africa such as malaria, respiratory diseases, leptospirosis or yellow fever, together with the fast disease onset with high death rates incited immediate investigations into the disease origin. The causative agent was named after the river Ebola, located in proximity to the village in DRC, where it was first discovered. 
Analysis of blood samples from infected patients by electron microscopy (EM) quickly revealed the remarkable filamentous structure of the virions18, which at the time had only been seen with MARVs, discovered a decade earlier 19. Within three years after its discovery, EM studies of isolated virus particles and infected tissue samples revealed striking structural similarities between MARV and EBOV particles despite their antigenic differences 18,20,21: both viruses were found to be primarily filamentous in shape with similar lengths and diameters, and contained similar structural features including the outer coat and an inner “nucleocapsid core” 20. 
The pathogenesis of EBOV disease (EVD) including the mode of transmission and disease progression has been well reviewed 22,23 and will only briefly be summarized here. Human-to-human transmission occurs via bodily fluids by direct contact of mucous membranes or nonintact skin with infected blood samples or tissue. After incubation times of 6-10 days, mild non-specific symptoms develop and rapidly progress into severe organ injury and often haemorrhagic fever caused by damage inflicted by high levels of EBOV replication and systemic infection. One of the factors involved in the rapid EBOV dissemination throughout the body is its ability to infect a wide range of cell types and tissues. Primary targets upon infection are dendritic cells and macrophages, which transport the virus via the lymphatic vessels to lymph nodes and nodal chains. The virus then enters the bloodstream and gets transported to different organs (with large viral loads found in the liver and spleen), where it replicates quickly. Although lymphocytes appear not to be infected, they have been reported to undergo apoptosis early after infection, contributing to EBOV-induced immune suppression. Both immune suppression and overactivation at later stages of infection have been associated with severe disease progression ultimately resulting in multi-organ failure and death within 6-9 days after the first symptoms occurred.
Humans and non-human primates are dead-end hosts with several intermediate animal hosts suspected to be involved in initial spillover events during zoonotic EBOV transmissions. Extensive efforts to identify the reservoir host all point towards members of the fruit bat family 24–27 and in 2009, the closely related MARVs were isolated for the first time from the Egyptian fruit bat, Rousettus aegyptiacus 28,29. However, live EBOV isolates from any potential reservoir host are still lacking today.

#### References
[^1]	Ivanovsky, D. Über die Mosaikkrankheit der Tabakpflanze. Zeitschrift für Pflanzenkrankheiten 13, 1–41 (1903).
[^2]	Chamberland, C. Sur Un Filtre Donnant de l’eau Physiologiquement Pure. C. R. Hebd. Acad. Sci. Paris, 247–248 (1884).
[^3]	Sankaran, N. On the historical significance of Beijerinck and his contagium vivum fluidum for modern virology. Hist. Philos. Life Sci. 40, 1–25 (2018).
[^4]	Lecoq, H. Discovery of the first virus, Tobacco mosaic virus: 1892 or 1898? Comptes Rendus de l’Academie des Sciences - Serie III 324, 929–933 (2001).
[^5]	Kausche, G. A., Pfankuch, E. & Ruska, H. Die Sichtbarmachung von pflanzlichem Virus im Übermikroskop. Naturwissenschaften 27, 292–299 (1939).
[^6]	Loeffler, F. & Frosch, P. Berichte der Kommission zur Erforschung der Maul-und Klauenseuche bei dem Institut für Infektionskrankheiten in Berlin. Zentralblatt für Bakteriol. Parasitenkd. und Infekt. 23, 371–391 (1898).
[^7]	Staples, J. E. & Monath, T. P. Yellow fever: 100 Years of discovery. Journal of the American Medical Association 300, 960–962 (2008).
8.	Anthony, S. J. et al. A strategy to estimate unknown viral diversity in mammals. MBio 4, (2013).
9.	Lefkowitz, E. J. et al. Virus taxonomy: the database of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV). Nucleic Acids Res. 46, D708–D717 (2018).
10.	Walker, P. J. et al. Recent changes to virus taxonomy ratified by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (2022). Arch. Virol. (2022). doi:10.1007/s00705-022-05516-5
11.	Kiley, M. P. et al. Filoviridae: A taxonomic home for marburg and ebola viruses? Intervirology 18, 24–32 (1982).
12.	Negredo, A. et al. Discovery of an ebolavirus-like filovirus in europe. PLoS Pathog. 7, (2011).
13.	Kemenesi, G. et al. Re-emergence of Lloviu virus in Miniopterus schreibersii bats, Hungary, 2016. Emerging Microbes and Infections 7, 1–4 (2018).
14.	De Arellano, E. R. et al. First evidence of antibodies against lloviu virus in schreiber’s bent-winged insectivorous bats demonstrate a wide circulation of the virus in spain. Viruses 11, (2019).
15.	Kuhn, J. H. et al. ICTV virus taxonomy profile: Filoviridae. J. Gen. Virol. 100, 911–912 (2019).
16.	Yang, X. Lou et al. Characterization of a filovirus (Měnglà virus) from Rousettus bats in China. Nature Microbiology 4, 390–395 (2019).
17.	Goldstein, T. et al. Discovery of a new ebolavirus (Bombali virus) in molossid bats in Sierra Leone. Nat. Microbiol. 3, 1084 (2018).
18.	Johnson, K. M., Lange, J. V., Webb, P. A. & Murphy, F. A. Isolation and partial characterization of a new virus causing acute haemorrhagic fever in Zaire. Lancet 569–571 (1977).
19.	Siegert, R., Shu, H. L., Slenczka, W., Peters, D. & Müller, G. Zur Ätiologie einer unbekannten, von Affen ausgegangenen menschlichen Infektionskrankheit. DMW - Dtsch. Medizinische Wochenschrift 92, 2341–2343 (1967).
20.	Ellis, D. S. et al. Ultrastructure of Ebola virus particles in human liver. J. Clin. Pathol. 31, 201–208 (1978).
21.	Ellis, D. S. et al. Ebola and Marburg Viruses: 1. Some UItrastructural Differences Between Strains When Grown in Vero Cells. Microscopy 211, 201–211 (1979).
22.	Martines, R. B., Ng, D. L., Greer, P. W., Rollin, P. E. & Zaki, S. R. Tissue and cellular tropism, pathology and pathogenesis of Ebola and Marburg viruses. J. Pathol. 235, 153–174 (2015).
23.	Baseler, L., Chertow, D. S., Johnson, K. M., Feldmann, H. & Morens, D. M. The Pathogenesis of Ebola Virus Disease. Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 12, 387–418 (2017).
24.	Leroy, E. M. et al. Fruit bats as reservoirs of Ebola virus. Nat. 2005 4387068 438, 575–576 (2005).
25.	Biek, R., Walsh, P. D., Leroy, E. M. & Real, L. A. Recent common ancestry of Ebola Zaire virus found in a bat reservoir. PLoS Pathogens 2, 0885–0886 (2006).
26.	Pourrut, X. et al. Large serological survey showing cocirculation of Ebola and Marburg viruses in Gabonese bat populations, and a high seroprevalence of both viruses in Rousettus aegyptiacus. BMC Infect. Dis. 9, 159 (2009).
27.	Olival, K. J. et al. Ebola virus antibodies in fruit bats, bangladesh. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 19, 270–273 (2013).
28.	Towner, J. S. et al. Isolation of genetically diverse Marburg viruses from Egyptian fruit bats. PLoS Pathog. 5, 1000536 (2009).
29.	Amman, B. R. et al. Seasonal Pulses of Marburg Virus Circulation in Juvenile Rousettus aegyptiacus Bats Coincide with Periods of Increased Risk of Human Infection. PLoS Pathog. 8, 1002877 (2012).







